content/motivation.rst, before:

Motivation
==========

.. questions::

   - What is the two-language problem?
   - How performant is Julia?
   - What is composability?
   - What will we learn and not learn in this lesson?

.. instructor-note::

   - 15 min teaching

Why was Julia created?
----------------------

Julia has been designed to be both fast and dynamic.
In the words of its developers:


   *We want a language that's open source, with a liberal license. We
   want the speed of C with the dynamism of Ruby. We want a language
   that's homoiconic, with true macros like Lisp, but with obvious,
   familiar mathematical notation like Matlab. We want something as
   usable for general programming as Python, as easy for statistics as
   R, as natural for string processing as Perl, as powerful for linear
   algebra as Matlab, as good at gluing programs together as the
   shell. Something that is dirt simple to learn, yet keeps the most
   serious hackers happy. We want it interactive and we want it
   compiled. (Did we mention it should be as fast as C?)*

From `Why We Created Julia
<https://julialang.org/blog/2012/02/why-we-created-julia/>`_ by
Jeff Bezanson Stefan Karpinski Viral B. Shah Alan Edelman

Speed
-----

Many researchers and programmers are drawn to Julia because of its
speed. Indeed, Julia is among the few languages in the exclusive
`petaflop club
<https://www.hpcwire.com/off-the-wire/julia-joins-petaflop-club/>`_
(along with C, C++ and Fortran).


.. figure:: img/benchmarks.svg
   :align: center

   Micro-benchmarks comparing Julia with many other languages. Taken
   from the `Julia benchmarks section
   <https://julialang.org/benchmarks/>`_


The two-language problem
------------------------

.. discussion:: Combining languages

   Have you ever written and prototyped code in a high-level language and then 
   found it necessary to rewrite or port it to a different language for performance?

To run code in any programming language, some sort of translation into
machine instructions (assembly code) needs to take place, but how
this translation takes place differs between programming languages:

- *Interpreted* languages like Python and R translate instructions line
  by line.
- *Compiled* languages like C/C++ and Fortran are translated by a compiler 
  prior to running the program. 

The benefits of
interpreted languages are that they are easier to read and write
because less information on aspects like types and array sizes needs
to be provided.  **Programmer productivity** is thus higher in interpreted
languages, but compiled languages can perform **faster by orders of
magnitude** because the compiler can perform optimizations during the
translation to assembly. This is also known as the two-language problem. 

In many ways **Julia looks like an
interpreted language**, and mostly behaves like one. But before each
function is executed, the Julia engine Low-Level Virtual Machine (LLVM) will 
compile it "just in time" (JIT). More on that later.
Thus you get the flexibility of an interpreted language and the
execution speed of the compiled language at the cost of waiting a bit
longer for the first execution of any function.



Composability
-------------

Julia is highly `composable <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composability>`__,
which means that by writing generic code, 
components (packages) that have been developed independently can simply be used 
together and the result is exactly what you would have dreamed about.

A well known example is the interplay between 
`DifferentialEquations.jl <https://diffeq.sciml.ai/stable/>`__,  a package for 
solving differential equations, and 
`Measurements.jl <https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl>`__, a package for 
working with magnitudes where uncertainties are explicitly reckoned.
Here's an example solving the simple pendulum equation: 

.. math::

   \ddot{\theta} + \frac{g}{L}\theta = 0


(adapted from https://tutorials.sciml.ai/)

.. code-block:: julia

   using DifferentialEquations, Measurements, Plots
   
   g = 9.79 ± 0.02; # Gravitational constants
   L = 1.00 ± 0.01; # Length of the pendulum
   
   #Initial Conditions
   u₀ = [0 ± 0, π / 3 ± 0.02] # Initial speed and initial angle
   tspan = (0.0, 6.3)
   
   #Define the problem
   function simplependulum(du,u,p,t)
       θ  = u[1]
       dθ = u[2]
       du[1] = dθ
       du[2] = -(g/L) * sin(θ)
   end
   
   #Pass to solvers
   prob = ODEProblem(simplependulum, u₀, tspan)
   sol = solve(prob, Tsit5(), reltol = 1e-6)
   
   plot(sol.t, getindex.(sol.u, 2), label = "Numerical")

The result is a plot of the solution to the differential 
equation with error bars!

.. figure:: img/composability.png


Drawbacks and workarounds
-------------------------

**Time to first plot**: If you open the Julia REPL and type in a plotting command, it 
will take a few seconds for the plot to appear because 
Julia needs to *precompile* the fairly large Plots.jl package. This 
makes Julia unsuitable for small scripts that get called frequently 
to perform light work. 

- Workaround 1: Use instead long-running REPL sessions
- Workaround 2: One can use 
  `PackageCompiler.jl <https://github.com/JuliaLang/PackageCompiler.jl>`__ to 
  create a precompiled package including Julia's base libraries which 
  can be run on a different computer.


**Ecosystem**: The ecosystem of packages is less mature than e.g. Python and R, 
so you might not find a package that corresponds exactly to your favorite 
package in another language.

- Workaround 1: It's straightforward to use external libraries in Python or R
- Workaround 2: Writing fast Julia code is easier than in most other languages 
  so you might consider writing your own version!

**Rapid package evolution**: Although most major packages have stabilized, there are still 
many packages that go through frequent large changes that can break your code.

- Workaround: Julia comes with a powerful package manager and in-built support 
  for isolated software environments where dependencies can be recorded exactly.

**Large memory footprint**: Because of precompilation of Julia's Base libraries 
the runtime of a running process can be very large. This can take away valuable 
memory for actual computation. 

- Workaround: There are plans to enable building more lightweight runtimes 
  in future versions of Julia.




What you will learn
-------------------

- What's different in Julia compared to most other languages.
- How to efficiently develop Julia packages and write unit tests.
- How to benchmark and profile Julia code.
- How to write efficient serial code.
- How to use multithreading, multiprocessing and MPI.
- How to write Julia code for GPUs.

We will be focusing on high-level performance considerations and parallelization 
approaches and not dig deep into low-level aspects. There is always a tradeoff; 
to squeeze as much performance out of a code as possible one often needs to drop 
down to lower levels of memory management, interprocess communication etc.
But using higher-level approaches can lead to significant performance gain 
for many scientific problems which makes it a good (initial) time investment.



What you will not learn
-----------------------

- We will only be scratching the surface of the topics we do cover. Make 
  sure to go through the recommended additional reading at the end of each 
  episode if you want to learn more.
- How to interoperate with other languages. Calling code in Python, R, 
  `C/C++ and Fortran <https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/calling-c-and-fortran-code/>`__ 
  is relatively straightforward but is outside the current scope.
- Julia has mature packages for scientific computing in many different scientific disciplines.
  An overview of the package ecosystem will be provided but we 
  will not go into any details.


See also
--------

- Lin, Wei-Chen, and Simon McIntosh-Smith. 
  `Comparing Julia to Performance Portable Parallel Programming Models for HPC. <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9652798>`_, 
  2021 International Workshop on Performance Modeling, Benchmarking and Simulation of High Performance Computer Systems (PMBS). IEEE, 2021.
- `Interfacing with C and Fortran <https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/calling-c-and-fortran-code/>`__.
- `Interfacing with Python via PyCall <https://github.com/JuliaPy/PyCall.jl>`__.
- `Interfacing to various other languages <https://github.com/JuliaInterop>`__.

Commit message:

adapt motivation to the reduced lesson with only intro

content/motivation.rst, after:

Motivation
==========

.. questions::

   - What is the two-language problem?
   - How performant is Julia?
   - What is composability?
   - What will we learn and not learn in this lesson?

.. instructor-note::

   - 15 min teaching

Why was Julia created?
----------------------

Julia has been designed to be both fast and dynamic.
In the words of its developers:


   *We want a language that's open source, with a liberal license. We
   want the speed of C with the dynamism of Ruby. We want a language
   that's homoiconic, with true macros like Lisp, but with obvious,
   familiar mathematical notation like Matlab. We want something as
   usable for general programming as Python, as easy for statistics as
   R, as natural for string processing as Perl, as powerful for linear
   algebra as Matlab, as good at gluing programs together as the
   shell. Something that is dirt simple to learn, yet keeps the most
   serious hackers happy. We want it interactive and we want it
   compiled. (Did we mention it should be as fast as C?)*

From `Why We Created Julia
<https://julialang.org/blog/2012/02/why-we-created-julia/>`_ by
Jeff Bezanson Stefan Karpinski Viral B. Shah Alan Edelman

Speed
-----

Many researchers and programmers are drawn to Julia because of its
speed. Indeed, Julia is among the few languages in the exclusive
`petaflop club
<https://www.hpcwire.com/off-the-wire/julia-joins-petaflop-club/>`_
(along with C, C++ and Fortran).


.. figure:: img/benchmarks.svg
   :align: center

   Micro-benchmarks comparing Julia with many other languages. Taken
   from the `Julia benchmarks section
   <https://julialang.org/benchmarks/>`_


The two-language problem
------------------------

.. discussion:: Combining languages

   Have you ever written and prototyped code in a high-level language and then 
   found it necessary to rewrite or port it to a different language for performance?

To run code in any programming language, some sort of translation into
machine instructions (assembly code) needs to take place, but how
this translation takes place differs between programming languages:

- *Interpreted* languages like Python and R translate instructions line
  by line.
- *Compiled* languages like C/C++ and Fortran are translated by a compiler 
  prior to running the program. 

The benefits of
interpreted languages are that they are easier to read and write
because less information on aspects like types and array sizes needs
to be provided.  **Programmer productivity** is thus higher in interpreted
languages, but compiled languages can perform **faster by orders of
magnitude** because the compiler can perform optimizations during the
translation to assembly. This is also known as the two-language problem. 

In many ways **Julia looks like an
interpreted language**, and mostly behaves like one. But before each
function is executed, the Julia engine Low-Level Virtual Machine (LLVM) will 
compile it "just in time" (JIT). More on that later.
Thus you get the flexibility of an interpreted language and the
execution speed of the compiled language at the cost of waiting a bit
longer for the first execution of any function.



Composability
-------------

Julia is highly `composable <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composability>`__,
which means that by writing generic code, 
components (packages) that have been developed independently can simply be used 
together and the result is exactly what you would have dreamed about.

A well known example is the interplay between 
`DifferentialEquations.jl <https://diffeq.sciml.ai/stable/>`__,  a package for 
solving differential equations, and 
`Measurements.jl <https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl>`__, a package for 
working with magnitudes where uncertainties are explicitly reckoned.
Here's an example solving the simple pendulum equation: 

.. math::

   \ddot{\theta} + \frac{g}{L}\theta = 0


(adapted from https://tutorials.sciml.ai/)

.. code-block:: julia

   using DifferentialEquations, Measurements, Plots
   
   g = 9.79 ± 0.02; # Gravitational constants
   L = 1.00 ± 0.01; # Length of the pendulum
   
   #Initial Conditions
   u₀ = [0 ± 0, π / 3 ± 0.02] # Initial speed and initial angle
   tspan = (0.0, 6.3)
   
   #Define the problem
   function simplependulum(du,u,p,t)
       θ  = u[1]
       dθ = u[2]
       du[1] = dθ
       du[2] = -(g/L) * sin(θ)
   end
   
   #Pass to solvers
   prob = ODEProblem(simplependulum, u₀, tspan)
   sol = solve(prob, Tsit5(), reltol = 1e-6)
   
   plot(sol.t, getindex.(sol.u, 2), label = "Numerical")

The result is a plot of the solution to the differential 
equation with error bars!

.. figure:: img/composability.png


Drawbacks and workarounds
-------------------------

**Time to first plot**: If you open the Julia REPL and type in a plotting command, it 
will take a few seconds for the plot to appear because 
Julia needs to *precompile* the fairly large Plots.jl package. This 
makes Julia unsuitable for small scripts that get called frequently 
to perform light work. 

- Workaround 1: Use instead long-running REPL sessions
- Workaround 2: One can use 
  `PackageCompiler.jl <https://github.com/JuliaLang/PackageCompiler.jl>`__ to 
  create a precompiled package including Julia's base libraries which 
  can be run on a different computer.


**Ecosystem**: The ecosystem of packages is less mature than e.g. Python and R, 
so you might not find a package that corresponds exactly to your favorite 
package in another language.

- Workaround 1: It's straightforward to use external libraries in Python or R
- Workaround 2: Writing fast Julia code is easier than in most other languages 
  so you might consider writing your own version!

**Rapid package evolution**: Although most major packages have stabilized, there are still 
many packages that go through frequent large changes that can break your code.

- Workaround: Julia comes with a powerful package manager and in-built support 
  for isolated software environments where dependencies can be recorded exactly.

**Large memory footprint**: Because of precompilation of Julia's Base libraries 
the runtime of a running process can be very large. This can take away valuable 
memory for actual computation. 

- Workaround: There are plans to enable building more lightweight runtimes 
  in future versions of Julia.




What you will learn
-------------------

- Julia's syntax and language constructs.
- What's different in Julia compared to most other languages.
- Tooling for writing Julia.
- How to efficiently develop Julia modules and packages and write unit tests.
- Which packages exist in Julia across many scientific domains.

This lesson focuses on the basics of the Julia language and how to get started with 
efficiently developing in Julia. If you want to go further and learn about how Julia 
can be used for high performance computing (HPC) and data science / high performance 
data analysis, we recommend the following to ENCCS lessons:

- [Julia for High-Performance Scientific Computing](https://enccs.github.io/julia-for-hpc/)
- [Julia for High-Performance Data Analytics](https://enccs.github.io/julia-for-hpda/)

This lesson should be seen as the starting point for learning the ins and outs of the 
Julia language. Make sure to go through the recommended additional reading at the end of each 
episode to learn more.



See also
--------

- Jeff Bezanson Stefan Karpinski Viral B. Shah Alan Edelman. `Why We Created Julia <https://julialang.org/blog/2012/02/why-we-created-julia/>`__
