content/setup.rst, before:

Setup
=====

Please follow the instructions on this page to install both **Julia** and **VS Code** with the Julia 
plugin on your machine.



Installing Julia
----------------

There are two ways to install Julia:

1. Downloading an `installer <https://julialang.org/downloads/#current_stable_release>`__ 
   for your operating system for the latest stable Julia version.
2. Using `Juliaup <https://github.com/JuliaLang/juliaup>`__, the Julia version manager.

Option 2 is the recommended installation method on Windows, MacOS and Linux.
The benefit of `juliaup` is that it allows users to install specific Julia versions, it alerts 
users when new Julia versions are released and it provides a convenient Julia release channel 
abstraction. Both installation methods are nonetheless documented here.



1. Using the Julia installer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

First download the latest stable release of Julia for your operating system 
`from the julialang.org website <https://julialang.org/downloads/#current_stable_release>`_.

.. figure:: img/installers.png
   :align: center

Follow the instructions to complete the installation.

Platform-specific instructions can be found at `HERE <https://julialang.org/downloads/platform/>`_.
It is convenient to be able to run Julia from the command line, so follow the instructions for 
``adding Julia to PATH``.  
For Windows users who do not already have a terminal installed, we recommend to install the 
`Windows Terminal from the Microsoft Store <https://www.microsoft.com/sv-se/p/windows-terminal/9n0dx20hk701?rtc=1&activetab=pivot:overviewtab>`_.



2. Using Juliaup      
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Full instructions can be found at https://github.com/JuliaLang/juliaup.

In short:

- On Windows you can install Julia and Juliaup either through the 
  `Windows store <https://www.microsoft.com/store/apps/9NJNWW8PVKMN>`_ or on a command line 
  by executing ``winget install julia -s msstore``.
- On MacOS or Linux, type ``curl -fsSL https://install.julialang.org | sh`` on a command line 
  and follow the instructions.  



3. Checking your installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Regardless of how you installed Julia, please ensure that you can open the Julia REPL by typing ``julia``
on the command line in a terminal, or by clicking the Julia icon on your Desktop or Applications folder.
You should see something like in the image below (nevermind the version number).

.. figure:: img/repl.png
   :align: center

Type ``versioninfo()`` to get detailed information about the installed Julia package.
To exit the REPL again, hit ``CTRL-d`` or type ``exit()``.



Installing Visual Studio Code
-----------------------------

First install VSCode according to the `official documentation <https://code.visualstudio.com/Download>`_. 



Installing the VSCode Julia extension
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After starting VSCode, click the ``Extensions`` button on the left-side menu, type ``Julia`` and 
click ``Install``` to install the Julia extension.

.. figure:: img/vscode_extensionbutton.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

.. figure:: img/vscode_juliaextension.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

You now need to configure the Julia extension and set the path to the Julia executable.
Click the ``cogwheel`` button next to the Julia extension:

.. figure:: img/vscode_extensionconfig.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

Then find the ``Julia: Executable Path`` field:

.. figure:: img/vscode_execpath.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

In this field enter the path to the Julia executable that you have installed.

If you are curious, scroll through the other possible configuration settings!



(Optional) Installing JupyterLab and a Julia kernel
---------------------------------------------------

JupyterLab can most easily be installed through the full Anaconda distribution 
of Python packages or the minimal Miniconda distribution.

To install Anaconda, visit `HERE <https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual>`_,
download an installer for your operating system and follow the instructions.
JupyterLab and an IPython kernel are included in the distribution.

To install Miniconda, visit `HERE <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`_,
download an installer for your operating system and follow the instructions.
After activating a ``conda`` environment in your terminal, you can install
JupyterLab with the command ``conda install jupyterlab``.



Add Julia to JupyterLab
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To be able to use a Julia kernel in a Jupyter notebook you need to
install the ``IJulia`` Julia package. Open the Julia REPL and type::

  using Pkg
  Pkg.add("IJulia")



Create a Julia notebook
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now you should be able to open up a JupyterLab session by typing
``jupyter-lab`` in a terminal, and create a Julia notebook by clicking
on Julia in the JupyterLab Launcher or by selecting ``File > New > Notebook``
and selecting a Julia kernel in the drop-down menu that appears.



Running Julia jobs on LUMI
--------------------------


Running Julia batch jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to run Julia batch jobs on LUMI, we use the following directory structure and assume it is in your working directory.

.. code-block:: console

	.
	├── script.jl     # Julia script
	└── batch.sh     # Slurm batch script

An example of the ``batch.sh`` script

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/bash -l
   #SBATCH --account=project_465001310
   #SBATCH --partition=small
   #SBATCH --time=00:10:00
   #SBATCH --nodes=1
   #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
   #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
   #SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=1000

   module use /appl/local/csc/modulefiles
   module load julia

   julia script.jl

An example of the ``script.jl`` code is provided below.

.. code-block:: julia

   println("Hello, Julia")
   
   println(2+3)
   
   println(big(10)^19)

   println("----EOF----")



Running Julia interactive jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


Interactive jobs allow a user to interact with applications on compute nodes. With an interactive job, you request time and resources to work on a compute node directly, which is different to a batch job where you submit your job to a queue for later execution.

Using ``salloc``

Using ``salloc``, you allocate resources and spawn a shell used to execute parallel tasks

.. code-block:: console

   $ salloc -A project_465001310 -N 1 -t 1:00:00 -p standard-g

Once the allocation is made, this command will start a shell on the login node. You can start parallel execution on the allocated nodes with srun.

.. code-block:: console

   $ srun --ntasks-per-core=1 julia script.jl



Using ``srun``

For simple interactive session, you can use srun with no prior allocation. In this scenario, srun will first create a resource allocation in which to run the job. For example, to allocate 1 node for 10 minutes and spawn a shell

.. code-block:: console

   $ module use /appl/local/csc/modulefiles
   $ module load julia

   $ srun --account=project_465001310 --partition=standard-g --nodes=1 --cpus-per-task=1 --ntasks-per-node=1 --time=0:10:00 --pty julia script.jl

Commit message:

update commands and julia scripts for interactive jobs on LUMI

content/setup.rst, after:

Setup
=====

Please follow the instructions on this page to install both **Julia** and **VS Code** with the Julia 
plugin on your machine.



Installing Julia
----------------

There are two ways to install Julia:

1. Downloading an `installer <https://julialang.org/downloads/#current_stable_release>`__ 
   for your operating system for the latest stable Julia version.
2. Using `Juliaup <https://github.com/JuliaLang/juliaup>`__, the Julia version manager.

Option 2 is the recommended installation method on Windows, MacOS and Linux.
The benefit of `juliaup` is that it allows users to install specific Julia versions, it alerts 
users when new Julia versions are released and it provides a convenient Julia release channel 
abstraction. Both installation methods are nonetheless documented here.



1. Using the Julia installer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

First download the latest stable release of Julia for your operating system 
`from the julialang.org website <https://julialang.org/downloads/#current_stable_release>`_.

.. figure:: img/installers.png
   :align: center

Follow the instructions to complete the installation.

Platform-specific instructions can be found at `HERE <https://julialang.org/downloads/platform/>`_.
It is convenient to be able to run Julia from the command line, so follow the instructions for 
``adding Julia to PATH``.  
For Windows users who do not already have a terminal installed, we recommend to install the 
`Windows Terminal from the Microsoft Store <https://www.microsoft.com/sv-se/p/windows-terminal/9n0dx20hk701?rtc=1&activetab=pivot:overviewtab>`_.



2. Using Juliaup      
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Full instructions can be found at https://github.com/JuliaLang/juliaup.

In short:

- On Windows you can install Julia and Juliaup either through the 
  `Windows store <https://www.microsoft.com/store/apps/9NJNWW8PVKMN>`_ or on a command line 
  by executing ``winget install julia -s msstore``.
- On MacOS or Linux, type ``curl -fsSL https://install.julialang.org | sh`` on a command line 
  and follow the instructions.  



3. Checking your installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Regardless of how you installed Julia, please ensure that you can open the Julia REPL by typing ``julia``
on the command line in a terminal, or by clicking the Julia icon on your Desktop or Applications folder.
You should see something like in the image below (nevermind the version number).

.. figure:: img/repl.png
   :align: center

Type ``versioninfo()`` to get detailed information about the installed Julia package.
To exit the REPL again, hit ``CTRL-d`` or type ``exit()``.



Installing Visual Studio Code
-----------------------------

First install VSCode according to the `official documentation <https://code.visualstudio.com/Download>`_. 



Installing the VSCode Julia extension
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After starting VSCode, click the ``Extensions`` button on the left-side menu, type ``Julia`` and 
click ``Install``` to install the Julia extension.

.. figure:: img/vscode_extensionbutton.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

.. figure:: img/vscode_juliaextension.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

You now need to configure the Julia extension and set the path to the Julia executable.
Click the ``cogwheel`` button next to the Julia extension:

.. figure:: img/vscode_extensionconfig.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

Then find the ``Julia: Executable Path`` field:

.. figure:: img/vscode_execpath.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 50 %

In this field enter the path to the Julia executable that you have installed.

If you are curious, scroll through the other possible configuration settings!



(Optional) Installing JupyterLab and a Julia kernel
---------------------------------------------------

JupyterLab can most easily be installed through the full Anaconda distribution 
of Python packages or the minimal Miniconda distribution.

To install Anaconda, visit `HERE <https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual>`_,
download an installer for your operating system and follow the instructions.
JupyterLab and an IPython kernel are included in the distribution.

To install Miniconda, visit `HERE <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`_,
download an installer for your operating system and follow the instructions.
After activating a ``conda`` environment in your terminal, you can install
JupyterLab with the command ``conda install jupyterlab``.



Add Julia to JupyterLab
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To be able to use a Julia kernel in a Jupyter notebook you need to
install the ``IJulia`` Julia package. Open the Julia REPL and type::

  using Pkg
  Pkg.add("IJulia")



Create a Julia notebook
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now you should be able to open up a JupyterLab session by typing
``jupyter-lab`` in a terminal, and create a Julia notebook by clicking
on Julia in the JupyterLab Launcher or by selecting ``File > New > Notebook``
and selecting a Julia kernel in the drop-down menu that appears.



Running Julia jobs on LUMI
--------------------------


Running Julia batch jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to run Julia batch jobs on LUMI, we use the following directory structure and assume it is in your working directory.

.. code-block:: console

	.
	├── script.jl     # Julia script
	└── batch.sh      # Slurm batch script

An example of the ``batch.sh`` script is shown below.

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/bash -l
   #SBATCH --account=project_465001310
   #SBATCH --partition=small
   #SBATCH --time=00:10:00
   #SBATCH --nodes=1
   #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
   #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
   #SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=1000

   module use /appl/local/csc/modulefiles
   module load julia

   julia script.jl

An example of the ``script.jl`` code is provided below.

.. code-block:: julia

   println("Hello, Julia")
   
   println(2+3)
   
   println(big(10)^19)

   println("----EOF----")

Run the command ``sbatch batch.sh`` to submit your jobs at the right directory.



Running Julia interactive jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


Interactive jobs allow a user to interact with applications on compute nodes. With an interactive job, you request time and resources to work on a compute node directly, which is different to a batch job where you submit your job to a queue for later execution.
You can either use ``salloc`` + ``srun`` or just use ``srun`` to create an interactive session. The two options are similar to ``sbatch``.


**Using ``salloc``**

Using ``salloc``, you allocate resources and spawn a shell used to execute the computing task.

.. code-block:: console

   $ salloc -A project_465001310 -N 1 -t 0:10:00 -p standard-g

Once the allocation is made, this command will start a shell on the login node. You can start your computation on the allocated node(s) with ``srun``.

.. code-block:: console

   $ module use /appl/local/csc/modulefiles
   $ module load julia
   $ srun --ntasks-per-core=1 julia script.jl



**Using ``srun``**

For simple interactive session, you can use srun with no prior allocation. In this scenario, ``srun`` will first create a resource allocation in which to run the job. For example, to allocate 1 node for 10 minutes and spawn a shell to run your computational task.

.. code-block:: console

   $ module use /appl/local/csc/modulefiles
   $ module load julia

   $ srun --account=project_465001310 --partition=standard-g --nodes=1 --cpus-per-task=1 --ntasks-per-node=1 --time=0:10:00 --pty julia script.jl
